Proposal: Go Compile Time Instrumentation SIG (#2490)
open-telemetry/community: projects/go-compile-instrumentation.md

- Flexibility: Developers are enabled to control their tracing experience (i.e, specifying custom span tags in certain places; opting certain code paths or instances out of tracing, etc...), which can be delivered via a declarative/programmable scheme.

By closely aligning with OpenTelemetry, the Go Compile Instrumentation SIG ensures that Go applications benefit from standardized, vendor-neutral, high-quality observability solutions that are both robust and easy to implement. Having one single, standard tool removes decision points from prospective developers, which makes the path to observability shorter & easier.

## Deliverables

- A flexible and extensible instrumentation framework for Go at compile time
- Out-of-box instrumentation for common libraries and frameworks in Go application
- Comprehensive documentation that covers a wide array of topics, including how to use the framework, configuration options, advanced usage scenarios, and answers to FAQs

## Staffing/Help Wanted
The following vendors are interested in improving this area:

- Alibaba
- Datadog

> - QuesmaOrg

Author: Fixed.

We also welcome everyone interested in this area to participate in the discussion.

### Required staffing

- Project Lead: @ralf0131(Alibaba Cloud), @dineshg13(Datadog), @pdelewski(QuesmaOrg)
- Sponsoring GC Members: @jpkrohling

> - Seed Approvers: @yiyang0(Alibaba Cloud), @123liuziming(Alibaba Cloud), @RomainMuller(Datadog)

Reviewer: Two of these people are not OpenTelemetry Github org members. Can we reword this to say something like the following:

```suggestion

Additionally, the following people will participate in the SIG and be added as approvers once they are OpenTelemetry Github org members:

- Future Approvers: @yiyang0(Alibaba Cloud), @123liuziming(Alibaba Cloud), @RomainMuller(Datadog)
```

Author: Looks good to me, I will accept the change.

> # Go compile time instrumentation

Reviewer 2: Could we rename this "Bootstrap Go compile time instrumentation SIG"? We intend projects to have a set of deliverables that allow it to have an end-state achievable in a given timeframe. This allows for better communication on progress towards certain milestones. I understand this project will be scoped to the initial implementation, and this SIG may continue to run later as a permanent SIG (or merged in with the Go SIG if appropriate).

The decision of forming this SIG as permanent or not can be deferred after the project is complete.

Reviewer 3: My view is that the framework will evolve over time, and the list of libraries will grow. Therefore, I see this as a never-ending process. Of course, this work could be continued as part of another SIG, such as GoLang: SDK. The decision to create this SIG was to have specific staffing—people who are interested in and skilled at these particular techniques. Otherwise, we could have done this work as part of the current GoLang: Automatic Instrumentation SIG, which focuses on eBPF. We discussed these ideas there (and even attempted it for some time by working on instrgen); however, the main issue was a lack of contributors. As a result, the decision was made to establish a separate SIG. Last but not least, why not (to be consistent) add the prefix 'Bootstrap' to the above-mentioned GoLang: Automatic Instrumentation and .NET: Automatic Instrumentation SIGs?

Author: I can get what Dan mean. In my opinion the SIG should be as a long running SIG(I do not see any reason that if will end for now), but a project is constraint and shall have a exit criteria.  Once we have separated these two concepts, what Dan suggest is to make it more clear about the scope of the specific project. I agree with Dan to add Bootstrap to the name. Once the SIG is bootstrapped and is running smoothly, this project can be closed, and the SIG will continue to run.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @ralf0131, you've explained better than I could :) I'd hope we can keep this project with a defined scope and then, of course, have the SIG running afterwards for as long as it's needed.

Author: Updated as suggested.

- Ease of Use: Developers can enable instrumentation with simple/zero configuration changes without manual code modifications.
- Extensibility: The instrumentation framework can be extended to support new libraries and frameworks as they emerge in the Go ecosystem, ensuring ongoing compatibility with the evolving OpenTelemetry landscape.
- Flexibility: Developers are enabled to control their tracing experience (i.e, specifying custom span tags in certain places; opting certain code paths or instances out of tracing, etc...), which can be delivered via a declarative/programmable scheme.

By closely aligning with OpenTelemetry, the Go Compile Instrumentation SIG ensures that Go applications benefit from standardized, vendor-neutral, high-quality observability solutions that are both robust and easy to implement. Having one single, standard tool removes decision points from prospective developers, which makes the path to observability shorter & easier.

## Deliverables

- A flexible and extensible instrumentation framework for Go at compile time

> - Out-of-box instrumentation for common libraries and frameworks in Go application

Reviewer 4: do you know already which ones will be done first?

Reviewer 3: We should deliver the framework first, as it is a prerequisite and serves as the foundation for library instrumentation.

Author: Agreed.

Reviewer 2: Related to my comment on the project title, I understand it may not be possible, but if we had a potential list of libraries we'd like to add instrumentation for, I think that would help to scope the project so that it has a clear exit criteria.

Reviewer 3: See my comment below. I think that list of libraries may change (grow over time), but it's possible to define initial list.

Author: The most important one the to deliver the instrumentation framework.
For the support for libraries and frameworks, my suggestion will be for each areas we provide support 1-2 libraries. The areas include:
* http/rpc: gin, grpc
* messaging: kafka
* Database: Mysql
* NoSQL: Redis
Of course, the names can be adjusted if there are other libraries worth mentioning.
Once we have these libraries instrumentation, the project can be ended safely. The support of other libraries will be continued in the long running SIG.

Author: I have update the proposal with the suggested change.

- Comprehensive documentation that covers a wide array of topics, including how to use the framework, configuration options, advanced usage scenarios, and answers to FAQs

## Staffing/Help Wanted
The following vendors are interested in improving this area:

- Alibaba
- Datadog
- QuesmaOrg

We also welcome everyone interested in this area to participate in the discussion.

### Required staffing

- Project Lead: @ralf0131(Alibaba Cloud), @dineshg13(Datadog), @pdelewski(QuesmaOrg)
- Sponsoring GC Members: @jpkrohling

Additionally, the following people will participate in the SIG and be added as approvers once they are OpenTelemetry Github org members:

- Future Approvers: @yiyang0(Alibaba Cloud), @123liuziming(Alibaba Cloud), @RomainMuller(Datadog)

> ## Meeting Times

Reviewer 4: do you think it's feasible to start already with rotating meeting times like the collector has? this way, most people will be able to attend 2/3 of the sessions

Author: I am leaning towards start the first couple round of meeting, and adjust if there is anyone who is interested. Of course, other comments are welcome.

- Biweekly Meetings: Every Thursday
- China (UTC+8): 16:00 – 17:00
- Europe (UTC+2): 10:00 – 11:00
- UTC: 08:00 – 09:00

Note that members from UTC-5 would not be able to attend the meeting, so the project members will try and make things work asynchronously as possible.

## Timeline

- Step 1: SIG Formation and Initial Setup
- Step 2: Collaborative Architectural Design (1-2 months)
- Step 3: Assignment of Implementation Owners
- Step 4: Implementation and Integration (1-2 months)

## Repo

open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation

> 

Reviewer 2: This does not have to be done now, but after the project is started, can you create a board and add it here? See info in https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/project-template.md#project-board

Reviewer 5: a potential list of libraries:
1. net/http
2. grpc
3. database/sql
4. gin
5. mux
6. gorm
7. go-redis
8. kafka
9. fasthttp
10. go-elasticsearch
11. mongo
12. logrus
13. slog/log
14. zerolog
15. zap
16. apache rocketmq
....
These are some of the libraries we are currently familiar with, and we will support them in the future based on their widespread use.

Author: Sure. I will put it into my todo list.

## Deliverables

- A flexible and extensible instrumentation framework for Go at compile time
- Out-of-box instrumentation for common libraries and frameworks in Go application. Initial support will be provided for key areas, each with one or two libraries. The proposed initial support for library instrumentation includes as follows and is subject to change:
  - HTTP/RPC: gin, grpc
  - Messaging: kafka
  - Database: mysql
  - NoSQL: redis
- Comprehensive documentation that covers a wide array of topics, including how to use the framework, configuration options, advanced usage scenarios, and answers to FAQs

## Staffing/Help Wanted
The following vendors are interested in improving this area:

- Alibaba
- Datadog
- QuesmaOrg

We also welcome everyone interested in this area to participate in the discussion.

### Required staffing

- Project Lead: @ralf0131(Alibaba Cloud), @dineshg13(Datadog), @pdelewski(QuesmaOrg)
- Sponsoring GC Members: @jpkrohling

Additionally, the following people will participate in the SIG and be added as approvers once they are OpenTelemetry Github org members:

> - Future Approvers: @yiyang0(Alibaba Cloud), @123liuziming(Alibaba Cloud), @RomainMuller(Datadog)

Reviewer 6: Use `Alibaba` here? we have all used the affiliated name.

Author: Good catch! I will update it together with the project board.
